an important part of object-oriented
programming is the concept of
encapsulation so the idea here is that
objects contain the data and the methods
that operate on that data and don't
expose the actual implementation to the
outside world so it's worth noting that
object oriented programming is not the
only way to achieve this and
languages such as modular 2 aimed to
provide encapsulation by using modules rather
than objects modular 2 enhance to
become modular 3 which was really quite influential in the design
of Java, C++ and also Python although the
object approach to encapsulation was
the only one adopted by Java Python allows us to encapsulate data methods
using either an object orientated
paradigm or a modular approach and we
saw the modular approach when using the
pytz module to handle time zone
information earlier in this course so
you don't have to know how pytz was
implemented in order to use it
the method that provides and the time zone information it uses are encapsulated
within the pytz module in fact pytz also
uses classes internally so it's possible
to mix both methods quite happily now
I repeatedly pointed out that everything
in Python is an object so it may seem
strange that a language that is really
so heavily based on objects doesn't restrict
us to using an object approach this is
one of the important design decisions of
the Python language the basic principle
being that we're all responsible adults
at least when programming now I mention this
because many languages work by imposing
restrictions on what can be done with
encapsulated data Java and C++ for
example restrict access to class fields
by allowing them to be marked as private
in Python you can indicate that a
method or attribute should be
considered non public but it's extremely
difficult to fully enforce this once
you've been introduced to the idea of
encapsulation it can be tempting to
spend a lot of time trying to enforce it
in Python
especially if he used 2 other languages
such as Java that do a reasonably good
job of preventing access to private data
but you be more productive if you accept
that Python takes a different approach
neither approach is necessarily better they are just different and each has its own
advantages and disadvantages so let's
continue our introduction to classes in
Python with another example we are going to look at
the concept of a bank account and
the classes are going to enable money to be
deposited withdrawn and will hopefully
anyway maintain the correct balance for
the account so I'm going to use the same
file we use previously but I'm just going to create a new
Python file so we are going call this one
accounts....so
let's start first by creating the class
so we are gonna call the class account so.... and it's going to be a simple
....
....and incidentally the convention is to
start class names with a capital letter and to use
camel case being that each time you
got a different word you capitalized
just that word so if we're calling this the account number class we would type something like that
capitalize each
word but basically start with a capital letter so that is the convention in Python so
ok will continue on with our init method so we want to passed name and balance to
it and we are going to assign the attributes....
.....
....
...and we are going to just check the amount that is passed
to make sure that its greater than 0...and only add it to our balance if its greater than 0 and we will add the amount to what
the current balance was like so....next
let's do a withdraw method....
...
....
.....ok so there's our class
and as I just mentioned the convention is to
start class names with a capital letter and
and to use camel case with that said you'll find
many the built-in classes in Python do
use lowercase nevertheless IntelliJ will
give you a warning if you use lowercase or
separate paths of the class name with
underscores...another warning as you can see should only use case convention it's not
happy if we use underscores now I've included a dot string on line 2 at the start of the class and it's a good idea to do
this with all your classes although it can appear to be
a bit redundant with simple classes like
this one which he can really figure out
the functionality just by glancing it's
a good habit to get into and once your class structures get more complicated
you will be glad that you did do this and so
will anyone else who uses your classes
and I'll be talking more about doc strings later when I show you what they used for in
more detail now the init method as you recall is used to initialize the
class and it's extremely rare to create
a class without providing an init method
now in an earlier video I used the term
constructor to described the init method but
really that's not strictly true in the
new style Python classes that will be
using for most of this section the Class
creation process involves two steps so
the first method to be called when a
class instance is created is new and this
takes care of the actual creation the
init method then customizes the instance
performing tasks such as giving
values to the data attributes for example so
technically the class constructor is the
new method which is actually calling
underscore underscore new underscore
underscore as you probably expect
generally speaking you don't need to
define new except in special cases
when subclassing certain types of
classes so I won't be discussing you
much in this section as a result now old style classes were the only type
of class available in Python 2 up until 2.2
when the new style classes are
introduced so in Python 2.2
onwards you could use both types of
classes I will discuss the Python 2 classes later on
so that your aware of the differences and
can recognize them but in Python 3
there are only the new style
classes and as a results I'm going to be
concentrating on those as we move
forward so getting back to the account
class the init method takes two
parameters in addition to self and these
are used to set the values of the data attributes name and balance now notice that all
the methods takes self as their 1st parameter and you saw IntelliJ
automatically adding that for us and
whenever we want to refer to the data
attributes we have to use the form self. and whatever the name of the attribute is
again as you see me type in this class in
Python there is no shorthand and self
must be specified if your used to java you can omit the word this before
a field if their references is not ambiguous
but in Python you can't do that so you need
to get into the habit of doing that each
time I just wanna remember i just fixed that
those warnings and add the extra space to keep IntelliJ happy
now the positive withdrawal methods
obviously a pretty simple and they adjust
the balance by the amount passed to the parameter
they also check that the amounts are positive
although as withdrawal its just a negative
deposit and a deposit is just a negative
withdrawal we could have used a single
method to handle both cases now there are
extra steps that are really sure of
implemented in the withdrawal method to
make sure there is enough money in the
account though so it makes sense to keep
the two transaction type separate the
show balance method again very simple it just
prints the balance data attribute so now the
that the classes been defined we
can create accounts with people and start
looking out for their money so
I'll start by creating account for myself
of course with a zero balance and then deposit
withdraw some cash let's go ahead and do
that
....
.....and lets
run this to make sure its workings account
created for Tim the original balance was
0 which would expect balances is a thousand
when we deposited 1000 and we've
withdrawn 500 and shows a balance of 500
so that's working fine
so this is a very simple example as I said and theirs plenty of room for improvement
now rather than having to call the show
balance method after each transaction
will probably be helpful if the balance if
the deposit and withdrawal methods
did this for us automatically I will also reluctantly
fix the problem that lets me take as much
money as I want regardless of the actual
balance so for both methods I'm just gonna
call the show balance method after
adjusting the balance preventing
unlimited withdrawals easily done just to
confirm the way the withdrawal method is
written at the moment I could quite
happily withdraw 50,000 and it would
work all be with a $49,000 overdrawn balance
but the point is it would work and we need
to restrict that so that when we are
withdrawing money we can only withdraw the
amount to the maximum amount we've got currently in the
account so lets go ahead and do that so
we are going to add to the deposit method so.....
...
....
....so we'll leave the
initial show balance call on line 27
but will comment out the other one because they can be called automatically
when we call those methods and lets put a valid withdrawal if we went back into 500
then we will put a invalid one in.....so lets run this one
you can see balance is 0 account was created for
Tim balance is 0
balance is 1000 it is calling the show balance method
now as we are calling the deposit
and withdrawal methods balance is deducted to 500 and we got a message
here when we called line 34 when line 34 was executed the amount must be
greater than 0 no more than your account
balance and it also reprinted the
balance you can see the balance is still
the same as it was when that method
was called so this seems to be working
fine and it does show that you can
call methods from other methods as I
mentioned earlier that you must prefix
all attributes with self and that applies to method calls in this class and you
probably saw when I was typing one of the
show balance methods that I forgot to put the self their and
IntelliJ was flagging as an error so
this may catch Java programmers out for
a while and it shouldn't be a huge problem
because as you saw IntelliJ will let you
know as soon as you tried to use attribute or a
method call within a method without using
self again just to confirm what I'm talking
back we can delete that we then get an error un-resolve
reference so we have to use self and likewise for the attributes we get an error
unless you specifically do it so It will probably
catch you out if your coming from another
language such as Java but after you
done a bit of Python coding
it becomes pretty straightforward and
again IntelliJ is helping you by flagging the error so you need to fix the
errors to run the program so sooner or
later you'll figure it out anyway but
with that said there is a fundamental problem
with the code for this account class and
although fixing it is easy their more
than one way to do so
I'm gonna cover that later but for now I'm
gonna see if you can spot the problem
until we get to that section where our
I will show you how to get around it
so we'll start working on that in the
next video